[DOC-539] [2024.2] [EA] Added colocated tables with tablespaces (#24811)
yugabyte/yugabyte-db: docs/content/v2024.2/explore/colocation.md

If new colocated tables are added to the same colocated database on both source and target universes with matching colocation IDs, then they are automatically included in replication.

For information on how to set up xCluster for non-colocated tables, refer to [xCluster deployment](../../deploy/multi-dc/async-replication/).

## Colocated tables with tablespaces

Colocated tables can be placed in [tablespaces](../going-beyond-sql/tablespaces/) {{<tags/feature/ea>}}. When a colocated table is created in a tablespace, the colocation tablet is placed and replicated exclusively in the tablespace.

During Early Access, by default colocation support for tablespaces is not enabled. To enable the feature, set the flag `ysql_enable_colocated_tables_with_tablespaces=true`.

### Create a colocated table in a tablespace

In a [colocated database](#databases), [tables](#tables) are created with colocation by default. To create a colocated table in a tablespace, use the following command:

```sql
CREATE TABLE <table_name> TABLESPACE <tablespace_name>;
```

> Use the same syntax to create indexes and materialized views in a tablespace as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use the same syntax to create colocated indexes and materialized views in a tablespace as follows:
```

```sql
CREATE TABLE <table_name> WITH (COLOCATION=FALSE) TABLESPACE <tablespace_name>;
```

### View tablespace and colocation properties

To check the tablespace and colocation properties of a table, use the [\d](../../api/ysqlsh-meta-commands/#d-s-pattern-patterns) meta-command on the table as follows:

```sql
\d table_name;
```

You should see output similar to the following:

```output
                 Table "public.t"
 Column |  Type   | Collation | Nullable | Default
--------+---------+-----------+----------+---------
 col    | integer |           |          |
Tablespace: "us_east_1a_zone_tablespace"
Colocation: true
```

### List all tablegroups and associated tablespaces

To list all tablegroups and their associated tablespaces, use the following query:

```sql
SELECT * FROM pg_yb_tablegroup;
```

You should see output similar to the following:

```output
  oid  |     grpname      | grpowner | grptablespace | grpacl | grpoptions
-------+------------------+----------+---------------+--------+------------
 16387 | default          |       10 |             0 |        |
 16391 | colocation_16384 |       10 |         16384 |        |
(2 rows)

> ```

Reviewer: Please remove the oid column. The oid column shows up only in pg15, in 2024.2 it won't be there. Sorry this was a miss from my side, in the original doc.

> The `oid` and `grpname` columns represent the tablegroup's OID and name, respectively. The `grptablespace` column shows the OID of the associated tablespace.

Reviewer: remove the `oid` description from here also.

Reviewer: yes we can include that

```

### Alter tablespaces for colocated relations

Colocated relations (the strategy of storing related data together to optimize performance and query efficiency) cannot be moved independently from one tablespace to another; instead, you can either move all colocated relations or none.

To move all relations from one tablespace to another, use the following syntax:

```sql
ALTER TABLE ALL IN TABLESPACE tablespace_1 SET TABLESPACE tablespace_2 CASCADE;
```

This command moves all relations in `tablespace_1` to `tablespace_2`, including any non-colocated relations.

To move only colocated relations, you can specify a table to colocate with using the following syntax:

```sql
ALTER TABLE ALL IN TABLESPACE tablespace_1 COLOCATED WITH table1 SET TABLESPACE tablespace_2 CASCADE;
```

This command moves only the relations present in `tablespace_1` that are colocated with `table1`.

Move a single non-colocated table using the following syntax:

```sql
ALTER TABLE <table_name> SET TABLESPACE <new_tablespace>;

```

### Back up and restore colocated database using ysql_dump

You can back up and restore a database with colocated tables and tablespaces in two ways:

> - With `--use_tablespaces` option in [ysql_dump](../../admin/ysql-dump/). Using this option during backup and restore includes tablespace information. The restored database requires the target universe to contain the necessary nodes for tablespace creation.

Reviewer 2: We should add --use_tablespaces to ysql_dump docs at some point

      CREATE TABLE t2_3 PARTITION OF t2 FOR VALUES IN ('APSOUTH') TABLESPACE tsp3;
      CREATE TABLE t2_default PARTITION OF t2 DEFAULT;
      ```

      The tablegroup information would look like the following:

      ```sql
      \dgrt
      ```

      ```output
                         List of tablegroup tables
          Group Name    | Group Owner |    Name    | Type  |  Owner
      ------------------+-------------+------------+-------+----------
       colocation_16384 | postgres    | t2_1       | table | yugabyte
       colocation_16384 | postgres    | t1_1       | table | yugabyte
       colocation_16385 | postgres    | t2_2       | table | yugabyte
       colocation_16385 | postgres    | t1_2       | table | yugabyte
       colocation_16386 | postgres    | t2_3       | table | yugabyte
       colocation_16386 | postgres    | t1_3       | table | yugabyte
       default          | postgres    | t2_default | table | yugabyte
       default          | postgres    | t1_default | table | yugabyte
       default          | postgres    | t2         | table | yugabyte
       default          | postgres    | t1 	       | table | yugabyte
      (10 rows)
      ```

>       Same `Group Name` indicates the colocated entities, and each tablegroup belongs to a different tablespace, as evident from the `grptablespace` column from the following table.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    The Group Name column shows which entities are colocated.
      
     Each tablegroup belongs to a different tablespace, as shown in the grptablespace column in the following table.
```

      ```sql
      SELECT * FROM pg_yb_tablegroup;
      ```

      ```output
           grpname      | grpowner | grptablespace | grpacl | grpoptions
      ------------------+----------+---------------+--------+------------
       default          |       10 |             0 |        |
       colocation_16384 |       10 |         16384 |        |
       colocation_16385 |       10 |         16385 |        |
       colocation_16386 |       10 |         16386 |        |
      (4 rows)
      ```

>       The same information after backup or restore without the `--use_tablespaces` option would look like the following:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      The same information after backup or restore without the `--use_tablespaces` option looks like the following:
```

      ```sql
      \dgrt
      ```

      ```output
                     List of tablegroup tables
              Group Name        | Group Owner |    Name    | Type  |  Owner
      --------------------------+-------------+------------+-------+----------
       colocation_restore_16393 | postgres    | t2_1       | table | yugabyte
       colocation_restore_16393 | postgres    | t1_1       | table | yugabyte
       colocation_restore_16399 | postgres    | t2_2       | table | yugabyte
       colocation_restore_16399 | postgres    | t1_2       | table | yugabyte
       colocation_restore_16405 | postgres    | t2_3       | table | yugabyte
       colocation_restore_16405 | postgres    | t1_3       | table | yugabyte
       default                  | postgres    | t2_default | table | yugabyte
       default                  | postgres    | t1_default | table | yugabyte
       default                  | postgres    | t2         | table | yugabyte
       default                  | postgres    | t1         | table | yugabyte
      (10 rows)
      ```

>       As evident from the above table, the colocation property is still maintained after the backup or restore. But all these tables now reside in the same tablespace which is the default one, as per the following table:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    The colocation property is still maintained after the backup or restore. But all the tables now reside in the same tablespace (the default one):
```
